this is the biggest scam that's ever
been pulled by a cult because you're not
causing their suffering it's the
religion that's causing their suffering
dr k i was raised in a cult how can i
overcome my fear of setting boundaries
with my very religious family when the
consequences may be excessive including
complete ostracism and eviction from my
home
okay hey dr k this is a problem i've
been trying to come to terms with and
overcome for several years here's some
background i was raised as a jehovah's
wit witness but no longer believe in it
i'm what xjw's call physically in
mentally out because i still feel
compelled to go through the motions to
maintain a relationship with my family
this is an extremely controlling and
insular religion which requires
exclusive devotion to its doctrines for
all its baptized members i got baptized
as a child before i ever had a chance to
know much at all about the outside world
i wanted
to believe my parents friends and role
models
were telling the truth and i was told by
many as a child that i would die at
armageddon if i didn't eventually get
baptized
i decided it must be true if they
believe it so as a kid just beginning
puberty i dedicated the rest of my life
to the religion in front of 1 000 people
and have since been held to that promise
of devotion and duty and a high moral
standard
a few years later i already had doubts
but it was too late i was already in
if i decided to tell anyone how i felt
it'd be i'd be deemed an apostate kicked
out of my home and shunned by my family
and friends
my late best friend was ostracized
disfellowshipped and was unable to speak
with any of his family or friends for
six months
trying to show his best that he was
repentant and worthy of friends again
he was reinstated at that point which
was actually pretty short when it comes
to disfellowshipping which usually lasts
years
even so his social life was completely
shattered and he was pretty much a shell
of himself
broken traumatized depressed and guilty
he ended up ended his life shortly
thereafter there's trauma for me around
all that because i don't want to end up
like him not to mention the fact that i
loved him he was my best friend for
years
i also took part in the shunning as was
required and feel partly responsible to
this day
doing that to him changed my perspective
completely it ruined his life and he
completely fell apart
all because he lied about drinking a
little too much at a party he was over
21 and the elders deemed him an
unrepentant sinner and had him
disfellowshipped
i've seen it happen over and over again
to so many people i love the thing is my
parents are victims in this too
they were both traumatized coerced and
taken advantage of themselves this
religion gave them a sense of security
when they had none if they believed they
had a choice i know they'd never shun me
they'd accept me for who i am knowing
this only makes it harder because i love
them so much and i don't want to hurt
them but i know i will
and that's the thing they don't have a
choice they have been told and truly
believe that god will punish
maybe even kill them at armageddon for
being disloyal and breaking the rule of
shunning and that i will ultimately die
at armageddon if i'm not shunned because
it's a strategy designed to use
emotional distress to bring sinners back
to the religion
i love them so much and i know how much
they love me it just breaks my heart
that their beliefs and those holding so
much power over them in the cult have
put them in such a horrible horrible
position which is so unnatural for a
parent to be in
now i'm 28 and i'm currently living at
my parents house after pandemic layoffs
i was able to save some money through
unemployment insurance and i've been
using as an opportunity to meet new
people and develop marketable skills
i now have an opportunity to start a job
doing something i absolutely love in a
couple of weeks but there's a good
chance this will cause quite a bit of
conflict between me and my parents
parents because of our differing beliefs
this new job will likely force me to
actively distance myself from my
family's religion and i know they're
going to confront me because i won't be
taking part in required service or
meetings they are compelled by religion
to pressure me to stay in
eventually i know where this will lead
and i'm terrified before long i may even
not have a home
please help me find the courage within
myself to do what i know is right for me
this to me is my dharma this feels like
the opportunity i've been waiting for
and i'm not
going to put it off for a religion i
have no interest in being a part of now
that my beliefs have changed i know this
was long and thank you for understanding
ps i would like to add another reason
ostracism is so hard to deal with
because
it is because they pressure others to
avoid worldly non-jws
people except
for
when it comes to work related things or
preaching
so even though i've been meeting some
people here and there i don't actually
know very many people outside my
family's religion and thus ostracism
would mean being completely cut off from
about every family friend i know
including my brother sister-in-law
nephew niece grandparents and extended
relatives there are very few people i
could reach out to besides my therapist
and some extended family out of the
state but that's it
okay
so let's understand a couple of things
the first is that when people think
about so i'm going to talk a little bit
about abusive relationships okay
so the first
surprising
thing that i learned about abusive
relationships is that most people assume
that abusive relationships are
propagated out of negative emotion
and there's certainly truth to that
right so like if you think about an
abusive relationship what we think the
person is feeling is a predominance of
like fear and shame and that's
absolutely true those things are there
and they're very prevalent
but in my experience the most surprising
thing about most abusive relationships
is how they're propagated by like
feelings of love and loyalty
so if you kind of think about you know
having an abusive parent
and like why you can't set limits with
them it's not because of fear it's
because of guilt
right it's because of like emotional
manipulation around positive emotions
so this is something that's really
interesting in western society is that
we tend to think that some emotions are
good and some emotions are bad
like pride and love are good things
right
and love is what it takes to make a
marriage but let me explain to y'all
that love is absolutely what destroys
half of marriages right it just happens
to be love with someone who's not your
partner
and so good emotion so in the east if
you look at the yogic perspective
good emotions and negative emotions are
equally good and equally bad
right
the problem is that
we don't really view them that way so
the first thing that i want people to
understand is that if you're in an
abusive relationship
the things that are going to tie you to
this relationship are actually the
positive emotions just as much as the
negative emotions so let's think about
this person and why they're thinking
about staying right what's their
hesitance to leave
they've already decided the religion's
not for them easy done
and i would i wouldn't doubt that there
are lots of people in cults
who there are a lot of people in cults
who stay out of fear or shame or
whatever
but i think there are probably an equal
number of people or maybe even more
people that stay out of the the religion
out of love
right so even for example like when the
jehovah's witness tell the parents you
have to shun your child
what do you think is the primary emotion
that they're using
to get parents to shun children
it's not fear or shame it's actually
love
so just think about this for a second
what is the reason behind shunning them
if they don't come to the right way
they'll be like they'll die in
armageddon
right it's actually love because you
don't want your child you're you're we
you have to shun them because you love
them the more you sh love them the more
you've got to shun them because you have
to bring them back with all of your
energy and it's love right it's like
they're they're playing on the love
and if you don't ostracize them then
then we're gonna like i think oftentimes
when it comes to parents and children
the love of the child is like the
primary thing that causes parents to
react the way that they do
and so the first thing to understand
about situations like this and
especially
abusive relationships
is that they they get propagated out of
positive emotions just as much as
negative emotions
and if we kind of think about like
how the manipulation happens it's like
all manipulating a sense of love because
this person is basically saying if i
leave my parents will have to shun me
and i don't want to hurt them
so what's keeping them stuck it's love
it's loyalty
so the first thing to to kind of think
about is that if you're trying to leave
an abusive relationship it's not just
about overcoming fear and overcoming
shame those are definitely big pieces of
it and for some people they're the
majority of it what tends to get people
tripped up is that you have to overcome
love too
right you have to overcome guilt that's
something that people sort of understand
guilt is sort of a negative emotion that
is oftentimes rooted in a positive
emotion
it's like why do i feel guilty because i
didn't do the right thing
but that in turn depends on your
definition of what the right thing is
so you guys get that so first thing i'd
say is that if you're trying to leave
this kind of thing you have to
understand that
you have to do things that will make you
feel like a bad person like you don't
want to hurt your parents therefore
you're not going to leave the religion
you guys get that so what you actually
have to overcome is your ability to hurt
your parents
and herein lies the biggest amount of
gaslighting
that happens in abusive relationships
and cults
because who is actually doing the
hurting so this is what's crazy about
emotionally manipulative
so how can i say this there are some
relationships that i've seen with kids
especially with their parents where the
child is held emotionally hostage and
this is what cults do they hold people
emotionally hostage and what are the
chains that keep you hostage it's love
because this is kind of bizarre so the
greatest trick that cults ever pull that
also happen in individual relationships
is fooling the person who's leaving
into thinking they are responsible for
their parents feelings do you guys see
what's happening that cult is saying
if your child if the child is saying if
i leave
my parents will be devastated and
they'll be forced to shun me they'll be
forced to choose between me and all of
their social friends because if they
don't shun me if they keep a
relationship they're gonna get shunned
so if i leave i will cause my parents
this suffering
this is the biggest scam that's ever
been pulled by a cult because you're not
causing their suffering it's the
religion that's causing their suffering
but the religion has actually
brainwashed you
into thinking that you have this in your
control that if you stay your parents
will be okay
they put that responsibility on you and
they sort of kind of give you this idea
that your parents well-being is due to
your behavior this is how they tangle
everyone in
right
because the cul the cult's not
responsible they're not the one like
just think about that like if your
parents get why can't your parents
maintain a relationship with you if you
leave
it's because the cult isn't letting them
right the jehovah's witness isn't
letting them you actually have no
responsibility over that
the real toxicity is coming from the
cult and this is what's so crazy about
this level of brainwashing we see it in
individual relationships especially with
like narcissistic parents
where parents like you know
kids will fool themselves or be
brainwashed into thinking
that the emotional well-being of the
parent is their responsibility right and
we'll sometimes even see this too like
so i remember i had a case where you
know there was a
two kids that were traumatized so one of
them was my patient
and then you know like the parent would
be like if you don't clean up you know
i'm gonna get angry and when i get angry
i'm gonna hit your kid your sibling and
when i hit them it's gonna be your fault
right this is the kind of crap that kids
get brainwashed with when the parent
misbehaves it's your fault
we see this in all kinds of gaslighting
where like you know we'll see this in
unfaithful partners yeah the reason i
cheated on you is because
you work so much and i was lonely and
you weren't there for me
therefore my cheating is your fault it's
your fault that you weren't around
so we do this this this happens a lot
with emotionally manipulative people
is they place the responsibility of
their behavior
on the person and in doing so they're
holding them emotionally hostage
even with earlier when we're talking
about visiting your parents for
christmas oh if you don't visit for
christmas i will be sad
and then the parent the kid feels guilty
and they're like oh i shouldn't make my
parents sad
right they're not accepting
responsibility at all
for why doesn't the kid the kid should
want to visit for christmas what the
hell
just think for a second about why they
don't like that's like what kind of
situation have you created
that his
forces your child into a particular kind
of behavior that causes them to suffer
to give you emotional benefit same thing
is happening with the cult
because somehow this person has been
tricked into thinking that their parents
health or well-being is in their control
if i stay in the religion my parents
will be happy
if i leave the religion my parents will
be sad therefore their happiness or
sadness falls to my actions and once
their happiness or sadness falls to my
actions then i'm emotionally held
hostage and i'm trapped in the cult out
of nothing to do with fear or shame it's
out of love
but this is what you really have to
understand is that it's not
their happiness or sadness is not yours
to control
right and this is where you kind of kind
of think about it a little bit from a
karmic perspective or like an eastern
perspective which is like
it's your job to take your actions and
your actions may have outcomes
but what your parents choose to do is on
them
right so if they choose to sever
themselves from you for their religious
belief and they suffer because of that
that's choice they're making
and you think that they're gonna make a
particular choice you'd also be
surprised
so i've heard this a surprising amount
where like people will leave the cult
and like sometimes like leaving the cult
will like bring people with you
that's why cults are so scared about
like people leaving
because like once one person like wants
one sheep you know breaks from the pack
it's like other sheep are like hey what
what the hell is going on here
so i've actually i
had a recent case uh maybe about a year
or two ago someone leaving and then like
what they were surprised by is that
their parents like their dad
actually was like you know honestly like
i haven't believed in this stuff for a
long time either
i just did this stuff because i thought
it was like there were some good things
to it but i haven't said anything to you
so it turns out that like dad wanted to
leave too and then like child daughter
left dad left
mom left
and everybody left it doesn't happen
often
because there is brainwashing going on
so in terms of like what should you do
if you're in this situation remember
that your dharma is to live your life
should you try to take care of other
people absolutely your dharma is to take
care of your parents
but don't accept responsibility for
things that are not yours to control
so your parents also have to like you
can't accept responsibility for your
parents actions or feelings you can only
accept responsibility for your actions
so you have to decide what's more
important to me escaping the cult
and like thinking about also like
thinking about the karma it's not your
karma your karma was to be born into
this situation your karma was to be born
into the situation
a lot of people think that karma means
destiny it doesn't mean destiny
understand that every day you live you
have the opportunity to sow seeds of new
karma so you have a choice right now if
you leave jehovah's witness there's a
decent chance you'll you know
meet someone one day
maybe get married maybe have kids and
then what kind of karma are you creating
for your kids what kind of circumstance
are you going to create for your
children down the line if you leave the
cult versus if you stay for in the cult
for the sake of your parents like
alleviating your parents distress
what kind of karma are you sowing for
the next generation
right so your duty is by all means to
yourself i think you have a duty to your
parents as well
but your duty to your parents
does not include
how can i say this
it can't include the decisions that they
themselves make
and i see this a lot this is really
challenging also like in addictions so
we'll see this with family members of
people with addictions
where the family member like the person
has the addiction and the family member
will try
so hard oftentimes parents
to help their kid with the addiction
their mortgage their household send them
to rehab and things like that and since
they love their child so much
and then kid like says screw you like
relapses pieces out for a while and then
kid comes crawling back six months later
and is like hey i found rehab it's 40
000 for a month mom can you take out a
second mortgage on the house and then
the mom is like sure because you love
your child right
and so you do your duty and you try to
help them
and then like you can try to help people
like as much as you want to but at some
point you've got to realize that they
themselves have to take responsibility
for their situation
you're not putting them in this
situation the religion is putting them
in the situation
they are putting themselves in the
situation they have already put
themselves in their situation
so you have to be very careful whether
you're in a cult or in an abusive
relationship
about who is actually responsible for
the situation that everyone is in
and all you can do is take the actions
that you think are right
and so take strength because dharma is
all about doing the thing that is
difficult it's not about what's doing
ease what's easy so i think this is a
good example of like doing dharma is
sometimes doing things that go against
your positive emotions because it is
your duty
so i'll give you guys an example
so there's a story you know there's this
indian epic called the mahabharat
and in the mahabharat there's this guy
named krishna and krishna is like
supposed to be an incarnation of god so
he's an incarnation of the god vishnu so
he's like all-powerful thing is when he
incarnates he's kind of op but not
everyone realizes it so like no one know
like not many people know he's god
so
this one of his like cousins or
something has a kid and the kid is born
with like six arms i think
and so there's this they call an
astrologer and the astrologer is like
like they're trying to figure out what's
going on with this kid and the kid the
astrologer says
whoever picks up the ch
someone is going to pick up your child
and when they pick him up four of the
arms will fall off
and that person will be responsible for
you know the death of your ch your child
so the person who like gets rid of the
arms is gonna be responsible for their
death
and so the mom is like handing the kid
to like all kinds of people and one day
christian is visiting
and it's kind of weird it's a weird
story there's lots of weird stories
they're all so nested so there's like a
lot of related stuff
so there's like a past garment things
like that to this person so then one day
she hands her son to krishna and lo and
behold four of the arms fall off and
then mom starts freaking out because mom
realizes oh [ __ ] this is krishna like if
christian is his enemy like my son is
screwed there's no way because he's an
incarnation of god and she's like
krishna promise me that you'll never do
anything to hurt my kid and he's like
well what do you mean why do you think i
would hurt your kid like i wonder like
your kid's great like i don't have no
peace and he's like no promise me
promise you you won't hurt my kid
promise me you want my kid
and
krishna says
you know i swear that if your child
insults me even a hundred times in a
single day i won't touch a hair on his
head
okay
so mom is like whoo easy okay he swore
this he's a man of his word
and so he's like totally fine so years
go by turns out that the kid is his name
is she i think she should ball and he's
like a complete ass
okay
and so then like many years later like
he's grown up
and um he visits a court he visits the
court of one of the a different king
yudhisthira
and he goes into the court and christian
is a cowherd so he's like sort of noble
but he's like from he grew up in in like
a village so he's actually a cowherd so
he wears like simpler clothing and
things like that plays the flute and
stuff
so he goes to the court and he sees that
like in the court there's the king and
like in a place of honor is like
christian is sitting and there are a lot
of like more powerful kings that are
sitting like lower down the table from
him so shishup all starts he's like what
the hell is this like this guy's a
cowherd and there are lots of like kings
who are more prestigious
than this guy
and like why is he being given a seat of
honor
right because shishupal has been like
tolerating because christian has been
tolerating his crap
and so he goes on insulting christian
and when he starts insulting krishna
people get pissed because krishna is in
a place of
you know respectable seating for a
reason it's because a lot of people
respect him and so some of his nephews
are like dude if you don't shut the [ __ ]
up i'm gonna i'm gonna like take you
outside and teach you a lesson and
christian's like no no like let him talk
like don't intervene let him talk as she
shoot ball gets riled up and riled up
and so krishna has the option
to
you know not
let anyone defend him and so shishupal
goes on insulting him 51 times 52 times
60 times 70 times everyone's like
getting super super pissed how
disrespectful is this guy christian is
like christian is sitting there and with
each insult he starts to smile
more and more and more and he's like no
go ahead let him speak his peace say
more keep going
keep going keep going say whatever's on
your chest if you think i deserve
disrespect and all of krishna's friends
are like bro like what is going on so he
insults him 100 first time
and then krishna takes out he's got this
thing called the sudarshan chakra which
is like a spinning disc
lops off shishy paul's hat
gg
the 401st insult
so this is the key thing
right you can't control
what your karma you can't control what
your karma places you in
but you have to do your dharma in a
particular place
right so in your situation
sometimes
like you know you can't control what
your parents situation is you just have
to act for yourself
and this is where when they shun you you
know the most you can do
is say like look this is a situation if
you guys want to shun me that's totally
fine
you can even say i forgive you for
shunning me this religion isn't right
for me and i think that any religion
that forcibly separates their parents
from their children is not a religion
that i want to be a part of
and at the same time i understand that
this is like a big part of your life and
i don't blame you for doing it and i
forgive you that's totally fine
like i forgive you for this i don't
believe in holding grudges i don't
believe in shunning people
i think it was wrong what happened with
my friend was wrong and like i'm gonna
do this job
i'm not gonna go to the required
services and if we have to distance
ourselves we have to distance ourselves
i love you guys if i'm never allowed to
talk to you again i love you from the
bottom of my heart i'm gonna try to go
live a happy healthy life
and i wish the same of y'all
i'm gonna miss all of you guys but if i
have to go i have to go
i understand that i'm not gonna blame
you for that and then you do what is
donately correct
and even though it's going to hurt to
say that you may never see your parents
again so that's absolutely going to hurt
i'm glad you have a therapist you're
going to talk through all that stuff
you're going to go to this job of your
dreams
and then the cool thing is you say the
only people i know
or some family a few states over no but
you're going to learn you're going to
meet a ton of people
right you're going to go to this new job
and you're going to learn how to make
friends
and the problem that one of the karmic
problems with life is that you don't get
to choose your family
which is why it's so great that you can
to a certain degree choose your friends
so you're 26 or 27 years old and it
feels like a long time but you have 40
50 years to go and you can cultivate
relationships with the kind of people
that you want
is it going to be traumatic absolutely
is it going to be difficult absolutely
is it going to be devastating absolutely
but generally speaking transplants are
right so the last thing i'll leave you
all with is just something from medicine
because what this person needs if you're
part of a cult essentially what you need
to do is a life transplant
so like if you think about what a
transplant is like a kidney transplant
what we're literally doing is there's a
part of a whole organism right so you're
part of this whole organism and we cut
you out of that
and you leave everything that you've
ever known everything that you've grown
up with
and we can actually move you into
another human being
and you can actually live there and
start to function there it requires a
lot of adjustment right we have to give
you some medication to present prevent
like you know
host rejection and all that kind of
stuff
but we're able to do this so in your
life you just have to understand that
it's going to be a transplant you're
going to come out of everything that
you've always known and been comfortable
with
that's going to feel like your body
right it's not just family and friends
it's your entire life
and you're going to be alone for a time
and then you're going to find a new
place to go and it's going to be a bumpy
ride don't get me wrong
but chances are it'll be the right one
because i think what we know from those
ex jehovah's witnesses is that most of
them tend to be pretty happy about
leaving
so transplants can absolutely be
difficult and traumatic and can also be
absolutely life-saving so if what you
need is a life transplant do it
right and get the support that you need
make sure that if your parents are never
going to talk to you again that you
forgive them if you can
that you don't blame them and you can
say like you know i've learned some
things from the religion
that's like acceptance and forgiveness i
don't know if jehovah's witnesses teach
that kind of stuff i thought they sort
of did
but maybe not
so be careful about emotional
manipulation be careful about
your positive feelings and be careful
about being held emotionally hostage
be careful about situations where you
feel responsible for circumstances that
were never yours to control to begin
with because that's how it works they
make you feel responsible oh my god i'm
going to hurt my parents no your parents
had a choice a long time ago sounds like
they joined jehovah's witnesses and it
helped them a lot
and so they have a choice today it's not
your job to take away that choice from
them it's your dharma to make the choice
for yourself and let them make the
choice for themselves
right they have to choose what's more
important to them their religion or
their child and they're allowed to make
that choice and when they make it it's
going to hurt like hell because chances
are they won't choose you but you may be
surprised
life is very long
right five years from now 10 years from
now maybe they'll run into you maybe you
send them a letter every now and then
they can choose to burn it or not see it
or whatever
you'll tell them hey you've got
grandkids here's pictures
miss you guys
you never know
so be careful about you know making
decisions today and like assuming that
it's going to be for a lifetime because
the world is changing very rapidly
right 10 15 years ago we didn't even
have smartphones and now there's a
global pandemic and now like you know
there's there are massive changes to the
way the world is is working a hundred
years ago no one could have fathomed
that someone would have difficulty going
outside
so
the world is changing very rapidly and i
think the most you can do is make the
right kind of decision for yourself
and good luck to you
so
here's a question so if i'm leaving home
for college and my parents get sad
because of that that's not my
responsibility so let me ask y'all basic
question yeah we're going to meditate
today let me ask you a basic question
okay
whose responsibility is someone else's
feelings
and who is responsible for your feelings
so it's kind of interesting right so i i
mean i'm going to leave y'all with that
question
so this is something that's happening a
lot nowadays which is that
um
you know i think there's a subtle
dividing line between
what we do and how it affects people
so i'll give you guys just a simple
example so
you know let's say that i'm dating
someone and i get them
[Music]
a pumpkin cheesecake for their birthday
and it turns out
that
they're devastated and they start crying
when i give them a pumpkin cheesecake
and then i'm really confused and then
they feel terrible and then i ask like
what happened and they're like well you
know i had a twin who was allergic to
pumpkins
and the day they died they ate a pumpkin
cheesecake
and so by giving them a pumpkin
cheesecake i have created all this
negative feeling for them
so like who's responsible for that
right
so sometimes i can feel guilty because i
gave them a pumpkin cheesecake
sometimes they can blame me they're like
you're an [ __ ] for giving me a
pumpkin cheesecake
my actions have created a negative
emotion right
and so who's responsible for that
let's say the flip end of the spectrum
hate speech
right so if i engage in hate speech that
is also an action that i'm taking
that makes someone feel really bad and
they start crying or bullying let's say
so who's responsible for that
you know so i think it's really tricky
because the world is definitely moving
in the direction
of if i feel a particular way it is your
fault
right that's the direction the world is
is going in and i think it's dangerous
because what we're doing is we're
actually
outsourcing the control of our feelings
to other people
that's a dangerous game
right so i personally like the yogic
view which is that
i take actions and i should be held
responsible for my actions
right so i should speak from a purpose
of ahimsa non-violence so in the yogic
view hate speech is wrong because the
intention is to hurt another person
and at the same time
it is my responsibility to manage the
feelings that i have on on the inside
and this is kind of interesting because
even
as i've worked with people who have
suffered from things like um
you know like
transphobia homophobia
racism things like that as i've lived
myself with those problems
you know what i sort of discovered is
that like it's i can't control what they
say but it is to a certain degree within
my control how i manage my feelings
so this is where someone can insult me
and they can damage me and they can hurt
me but there's also a certain layer
of
emotional independence that i'm allowed
to have
so i get to take control of my emotions
that's something that i'm not willing to
give up someone else
another good example of someone who
illustrated this principle really really
well is viktor frankl
so in man's search of meaning you know
viktor frankl was in the concentration
camps during the holocaust and he sort
of discovered that there's like an
internal independence marcus aurelius is
another example of someone who's who did
this
um
and and so i think this is that's kind
of like where stoicism comes from right
so i think these are kind of situations
where when you kind of say like
are you responsible for your parents
being sad
in a sense yes because you are leaving
right but i also think that that sadness
is their responsibility
and also that i don't and this kind of
goes back to earlier what i was saying
about the yogic point of view where like
good and negative emotions are the same
sadness can be good and happiness can be
bad
it's kind of bizarre but generally
speaking i think that's true we can get
a lot of benefit from sadness we can get
a lot of benefit from fear and shame i
think if we didn't get any benefit from
it we wouldn't have evolved to have
those emotions
and we don't feel happy permanently we
don't feel joy permanently right and in
fact when we feel pride permanently what
do we call that that sometimes gets
called narcissism
so is it your responsibility to not make
your parents sad i mean you can do that
if you want to but something tells me
that if you stayed home from college
they'd be sad anyway right what are you
going to do stay home for the rest of
your life
how are they going to feel when you're
40 you're going to feel pride and happy
you just stayed at home your entire life
so you can't you can only control your
actions
you can't really control how your
actions affect other people
i know it sounds kind of weird
and i'm not saying that you shouldn't
consider how they're gonna affect other
people
but
you know it's like kind of a bizarre
situation so if you look at like you
know some people enjoy
you know being
i don't even know like you know if you
look at like we had a talk about bdsm
the other day so like when you think
about you know sexuality like you don't
think about pain as a part of that but
that's what some people like
right so different people like different
things and all you have to do you can
only do what you believe to be right
and i think as long as you're you know
what are you operating from are you
operating from a place of ahimsa of
non-violence are you operating from a
place of like you're operating from a
place of hatred are you operating from a
place of love
and sometimes like you can do things
that are loving that are also like will
upset people so like sometimes i try to
teach like i was saying restraint over
restriction
sometimes i have to set limits with my
kids and they become sad
but i do that and like i don't want to
make them sad but i still think it's
important to like be a good parent like
teach them how to brush their teeth
every day
because i think that's something that
will help them in the long term
so it's tough
so i think that's where you know when
you say what's your responsibility if
you're going to college i'd say your
responsibility is if they're going to
miss you
that you should try to call and text or
video call them like as often as
possible
right
you can do that you can say hey i miss
you guys too
i'm having a great time at college
i'm learning a lot and you can also
study really hard because you are
causing your parents some degree of
sadness so you can make their pain worth
its while by you excelling when you make
when they like when you guys are
suffering for this right so this is
something that i understand very well
because i was gone for three weeks and
like it made my kids sad
so that's where like i have to make it
worth
you know
i'm inflicted sadness on my children by
like going to ti
and so they miss me for a long time and
like that's sad so i'm gonna do my level
best to like make sure that that was
worth the time you make it worth it
you